From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. [music] This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> For more than six decades, the United
States has tried [music]
and failed to topple the regime in Cuba.
But after ousting Cuba's closest ally,
[music] Nicolas Maduro, and pushing the
country into dire economic crisis, the
Trump administration is closer [music]
than ever to forcing radical change on
the island.
Today, [music] my colleagues Frances
Robles and Michael Crowley on how this
latest escalation [music] is pushing
Cuba to the brink, and whether this
time, finally, the US government will
get what it wants.
>> [music]
>> It's Tuesday, February 17th.
>> Frances, it's wonderful to have you here
on The Daily. Thanks for having me. So,
I think it's fair to say you are The New
York Times Cuba Whisperer. You've been
covering Cuba for how long? Decades?
Decades. I actually looked it up today.
I wanted to see what was my first
article about Cuba, and it was the
summer of
1993.
Wow.
So, you obviously have seen this country
go through crisis after crisis in that
time.
But I think there is something about
this moment that feels different, at
least for me looking at what's playing
out on the island.
Does that feel right to you?
100%. I interviewed an economist who
told me a funny joke that says, "How
come Cubans have such short index
fingers?" Well, I don't know why. Well,
it's from banging their finger on the
table for years saying, "Next year we'll
be having roast pork in Havana at
Christmas."
They've been saying this for 60 years
that this is the last year of the Cuban
regime. But then this [clears throat]
time, all the people that I interview,
very serious people, academics,
economists, people who have written
books on the subject, they all say the
same thing. They say, "You know what?
This time it might actually be true."
And the word that you hear over and over
again is unsustainable.
This current situation in Cuba is
unsustainable. And what's unsustainable
about it? What are the people that
you're talking to say? The big issue
right now, Cuba produces about 40% of
the oil that it needs for domestic
purposes. And so it was receiving the
other 60% either from Venezuela or from
Mexico. Now it is getting zero of that.
Acute fuel shortages have gotten even
worse after US President Donald Trump
announced 2 weeks ago that he'd impose
tariffs on any country sending oil to
Cuba.
The standoff between the two countries
is raising fears over a full-blown
humanitarian crisis. [music]
And so you're starting to see buses are
not going to be able to run.
>> same time, hospitals have already shut
down in the last days. And schools and
universities have had to reduce their
teaching schedules to save [music] fuel.
They're announcing that banks will only
be open by certain days. Everyone's
riding tricycles now. The car business
is falling apart. They're going to get
to a point where they don't have the
gasoline to deliver food to the store.
So what are people supposed to do?
I'm going to look for a better life
because things here are really bad.
That's the big thing that people are
wondering. How long [music] does this go
on for and how bad does it get before
somebody cries uncle.
>> [music]
>> Right. You're saying basically that a
corner has been turned in Cuba after
years and years of suffering, there may
be a kind of change coming. And what we
understand from your reporting and from
honestly the public statements of the
administration is that this crisis that
Cuba is facing now is intentional. It's
the result of a carefully planned policy
right by the Trump administration. Can
you just lay out for me why? Why has the
US been so dead set on toppling the
regime in Cuba?
I guess it comes down to the simple fact
that the United States government does
not want a communist regime in their
backyard. I mean, a one-party state, a
centralized economy, lack of basic
freedoms, jailed dissidents.
This is the antithesis of what the
United States represents and what it
wants in the Western Hemisphere. Right.
And so we have to turn the clock back to
1960.
Fidel Castro wins the revolution in
1959, but it's in 1960 that he
announces, you know, his intention, his
sort of socialist zeal.
Cuba goes on a patriotic binge after the
government seizes its score of US
companies.
And he starts confiscating lots of
industries.
Oil refinery, the sugar industry, the
telephone company, banks, never mind
private property, you know, people's
houses.
So that gives the United States the
reason, you know, oh, oh, you're going
to confiscate our oil company? Well,
watch this.
So, this is where the United States
government really starts its very
aggressive stance against Cuba and its
quest its decades long quest to topple
this regime. Right.
The assault has begun on the
dictatorship of Fidel Castro.
Cuba In 1961,
we invaded Cuba
landing over 1,000 men at the Bay of
Pigs in what was absolutely disaster for
the United States.
Short time after that,
the Kennedy administration made a full
embargo on Cuba and that meant
cutting off any kind of ability Cuba
would have to buy anything on the
international market. So, near total
isolation. Yes, near total isolation.
[music]
It shall be the policy of this nation
to regard any nuclear missile
launched from Cuba against any nation in
the Western Hemisphere
as an attack
by the Soviet Union on the United States
requiring a full retaliatory response
upon the Soviet Union. And then, 1962,
Cuban Missile Crisis. You know, we
almost went to nuclear war with Cuba
because it was discovered that Cuba had
allowed Russia to place nuclear missiles
on the island and so that was an
incredibly tense moment. Mhm. During all
this time, the CIA is trying to kill
Fidel Castro left and right. I mean,
there's you know, lots of lore about
poisoned cigars and things of that
nature and he always survived. They
always came out standing.
>> [music]
>> And one of the reasons they did, I think
it's really important to underscore that
one of the mechanisms that the Cuban
government had was migration. It was an
escape valve. Whenever things got too
hot, when the discontent got to be too
much, when it was clear that people were
really unhappy, Fidel Castro would open
the doors and let people out. And so,
for example, in the spring of 1980, you
had a major incident that was known as
the Mariel boatlift.
>> Today, 23 boats filled with over 800
Cubans reached Key West, Florida. US
Marine It started with a protest at the
Peruvian Embassy, and it ended with
125,000 people getting on boats and
literally just sailing to South Florida.
The president has literally opened the
floodgates, placing no limitations on
the number of Cubans entering the United
States.
>> [music]
>> And you're saying Fidel Castro actually
encouraged this. He said, "Please,
leave.
These boats can go wherever you want
them to. Don't stay here." That's
absolutely right. You know, for for
many, many years, until fairly recently,
maybe about a decade ago, it was very
difficult to leave Cuba. You had to get
an exit card to go. And so, this was his
blanket exit card for everybody.
People's families were coming from from
the United States with boats to pick
people up. Like, "Okay, we can go. Let's
go." He also emptied prisons and mental
institutions. But, the thing that's
really important to note is that it's a
technique that the Cuban government has
used periodically for the past 66 years.
Got it.
>> But, it wasn't the only way that they
survived. The other thing that was a
really important issue was that they
were able to turn to the Soviet Union,
and the Soviet Union kept Cuba afloat.
But, the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991.
>> Right. And that launches a really,
really horrible time for Cuba, which is
known very euphemistically as the
special period. And it's a time
of really severe food shortages, um just
a lot of suffering throughout the entire
island. In fact, it launches another
migration episode.
>> Mhm. So, it's just yet another moment in
this history where everybody thought,
"Wow, it can't get worse. Look at how
bad this is. This is absolute chaos."
Everyone was convinced that it had to be
the end.
And just thinking about the history that
you've sketched out here, it feels like
at every turn the US
thought that it was creating the
conditions that would internally, you
know, force people to rise up inside of
Cuba, that it would force change from
within by creating this pressure cooker.
But the Cuban regime responded to that
by saying, "Well, it's not a pressure
cooker if we have a valve, and that
valve is sending people to the United
States." Basically, exporting the people
who are most likely to push for change
from within. That's absolutely right,
Natalie. You know, and the end result of
that is this huge Cuban-American
community in South Florida that has
become a really powerful movement that
has Congress people who's have always
helped dictate Cuba policy. And you have
a lot of people who were supporters of
this idea that the US had to play a key
role in helping to topple the Castro
government. So, back in Cuba,
the regime has survived the special
period, but they've lost their biggest
benefactor in the Soviet Union. So, what
do they do?
Well, when you lose your sugar daddy,
you got to get yourself another one.
So, when Soviet Union fell, they started
relying on Venezuela.
The
kept them afloat for almost 25 years.
The other thing they did was open to
tourism.
So, let's if you'll allow me to jump
forward in time a little bit. President
Obama decides that he's going to try the
exact opposite of what everybody else
tried, you know. So, everybody else is
trying to suffocate Cuba to get them to
fold. He's like, you know what? We're
going to do the opposite. We're going to
let people visit. We're going to let,
you know, private businesses get
licenses to do business there. They were
hoping that the opening of Cuba will
allow it to fold. Right.
>> We'll get all the Cubans on the island
to say, "Wait a second. You mean there's
an internet? There's cell phones? You
know, I I want a piece of that." And so,
from about, let's say, 2015, '16, '17,
you see this big boom in tourism. And
that's another point where people think,
"Oh, yeah. Now the Cuban government is
really going to end because there's no
way that people in Cuba will see how the
rest of the world lives Right. and be
able to stick it out with this
government." The idea from the Obama
administration at the time was, "Okay,
sticks have not worked in Cuba for like
half a century. So, we should try
something else. And that something else
should be exposing Cubans to the
benefits of capitalism." That's exactly
right. It didn't exactly work because
the Cuban government saw it as a Trojan
horse. And they put up a lot of
obstacles to that opening. So, other
than a few years of a lot of tourism,
the economic opening never really
happened. Right. But, when Trump comes
along, he basically says, "Okay, well,
that's enough of that." You know, so, he
reverses just about everything that
President Obama had done. You know, and
he puts back in travel restrictions,
restrictions on sending money to Cuba,
restrictions on doing business there.
And he takes things very much back to
the traditional Republican we're going
to choke these people until they fold
strategy.
So, back to sticks, basically. Back to
sticks.
That's was always going to be Trump's
plan.
And what's interesting is, you know, the
Trump administration ended, Biden took
his place,
and he didn't change that much, to be
honest. Mhm. A lot of these measures
stayed in place.
But then Trump won again, and you get
this sense that this administration
decided this is our shot.
That this is going to be the
administration that succeeds where so
many before them failed.
And what they've done has really brought
the Cuban government to its worst crisis
that it's suffered in its 67 years in
existence.
Its future has never been more
precarious.
>> [music]
>> After the break, we get inside the Trump
administration's strategy with my
colleague Michael Crowley.
We'll be right back.
So, Michael, our colleague Frenche
Robles just told us that the Cuban
regime is more vulnerable than it's ever
been because of the policies that the
Trump administration has carried out.
You cover the administration's foreign
policy. So, take me inside that story.
What are you seeing?
>> [gasps]
>> Well, this is very much by design. You
know, the Trump administration
until now has not talked a lot about
Cuba, but has always had big plans for
Cuba. And I think it's important to
understand how much this is coming from
Marco Rubio. Mhm. Rubio is driving this,
and we may be approaching an end game
that Rubio has worked towards for
decades now. Okay, so Rubio is
absolutely central, you're saying. Why
is this his singular obsession? Just
tell me what his motivations are.
You know, let's start with his
background and origins. Rubio is
Cuban-American.
His parents fled to the United States
from Cuba before Castro took power in
1959, but were very strongly
anti-Castro. So, Rubio grows up in a
community of Cuban exiles, and he makes
it really his signature issue
as he dives into the politics of South
Florida, where Cuban exiles who are
vituperatively opposed to the Cuban
regime have enormous influence. And
Rubio has made his opposition to the
Cuban government and his efforts to
promote its overthrow central to his
political identity for his entire
career. And maybe the most vivid detail
to underscore that is when Rubio himself
ran for president in 2016. Thank
[cheering] you.
Thank you. He announced his campaign at
what is known as the Freedom Tower in
Miami. In this very room,
five decades ago,
tens of thousands of Cuban exiles began
their new lives in America.
>> Which was the first stop for those Cuban
refugees to sort of announce their
arrival in the US. And if America once
again accepts the mantle of global
leadership.
By ending the near total disregard
for the erosion of democracy and human
rights around the world, especially
Cuba, Venezuela, and Nicaragua.
It's interesting, you're saying his
career was forged inside this
Cuban-American community that, Frenchy
told us this as well, has been both
powerful and very keen on toppling the
Castro regime. This is Rubio. This is
his people.
That's right. This is at the core of his
personal and political identity. And I
think that for him, possibly even more
than for President Trump, getting rid of
the current Cuban government would be a
sort of crowning legacy achievement that
would make him feel like his political
career had all been worth it. It's all
been kind of working toward this if he
can get it.
>> [music]
>> And obviously now he has the reins of US
foreign policy as Secretary of State, as
National Security Advisor. So, how have
you seen this play out for him?
Well,
you've seen this incredible focus
by the Trump administration on the
Western Hemisphere and in particular
Latin America. And Rubio really
spearheaded the Trump administration's
pressure on Venezuela's leader Nicolas
Maduro, which ultimately led to Maduro's
capture
in early January. Now, this actually
goes straight to the Cuba question that
we're talking about. I know from my
reporting that Rubio has made a very
explicit connection between bringing
down Maduro and bringing down the Cuban
government. Hmm. The thinking is that
Venezuela and Cuba became very close
allies over the past few decades. The
Cubans provided Venezuelans with
military training and intelligence, and
the Venezuelans were shipping large
amounts of oil to Cuba. Cuba doesn't
have a lot of oil suppliers. So, Rubio's
calculus was, if you can get rid of
Maduro and cut off those Cuban oil
supplies to Havana. That is a huge blow
that brings you a lot closer to bringing
down the Cuban government. You're saying
that Rubio wanted to oust Maduro because
he's not in favor of this regime,
obviously, but also he sees this as a
way of weakening Cuba. Frenchie had told
us that Cuba had come to rely on
Venezuela for oil, and so by getting
control of Venezuela's oil, Rubio thinks
that he can directly impact the Cuban
regime.
That's right. I think for Rubio,
probably the most important thing about
what's happening in Venezuela right now,
is that we have forced Venezuela to stop
shipping oil to Cuba. Right. And to lose
such a key nearby ally and an oil
supplier in Venezuela is a major
development and a really bad one for the
Cubans.
On top of that, the Trump administration
is pressuring other countries to not
step in and come to the rescue of the
Cubans. And in late January, President
Trump issued an executive order
threatening tariffs against any country
that supplied Cuba with oil. So now we
have already seen another major blow for
the Cuban government, which is that the
president of Mexico has said that she
has suspended oil shipments to the
island.
And Mexico had actually overtaken
Venezuela recently as the island's top
supplier.
So that's the second major supplier to
the Cuban government that has stopped
sending oil just this year. Right. It's
just a major loss for the Cuban regime.
And having covered Mexico as the bureau
chief there, I can say that the
president, Claudia Sheinbaum, just it
must have been an incredibly wrenching
moment for her. She's a leftist, she's
the daughter of left-wing parents, she's
been an outspoken supporter of the Cuban
government, and I can imagine she's
looking at this situation where she's
really between a rock and a hard place.
I mean, Trump's not giving her or any
country much of a choice here.
You're absolutely right. But I think
what we're seeing is the reality today
that American economic might
coupled with President Trump's
willingness to use that economic power
in ways that other presidents have not.
And then I think this long slow dimming
of the glamour of the Cuban revolution
and Fidel Castro and the impact he had
on people around Latin America, I think
that it's probably a little more doable
than it was say a generation ago. Right.
The Castros are no longer in power. It's
been a long time since the revolution. I
mean, things have changed on the island,
too. You're right. Yeah. Yeah. So, I
think that brings us to the present day
where this policy has now really put
Cuba in this extremely difficult
situation where conditions on the ground
are just very dire, no oil is coming in,
and this island seems close to an
all-out humanitarian crisis.
My question is, how in the minds of
Marco Rubio and President Trump do you
get from a humanitarian crisis to regime
change? Like,
what's the calculation there? It's not
easy, and
you [clears throat] know, honestly, it's
not clear to me that they have it
entirely figured out because there's
just not a simple way to do this. Hm.
You know, it's very clear that Rubio in
particular wants to see this regime
brought down and consigned to the
dustbin of history. But at the same
time, I think Rubio recognizes that this
is not something you can do overnight
for a bunch of reasons. And you know,
one of them is that it comes with real
risks. I've been talking in my reporting
to a lot of people who track Cuba
extremely closely.
And you know, what they warn is that
this is a monolithic brittle
political system.
There's no political opposition because
the government there has been repressive
for so long.
It's going to be really hard to find
some kind of a
opposition leader who could take over or
even to do some kind of a short-term
transition to a different government.
And if you bring down the entire
government without something to replace
it,
you risk total chaos, violence,
mass migration from Cuba toward Florida,
a lot of conditions that would put the
Trump administration in a very
uncomfortable position of having to make
choices about what they do next.
So, the question is, is there a way that
you can
kind of engineer a a soft landing?
What would that look like, Michael, a
soft landing? I am wondering what the
best-case scenario the Trump
administration imagines here. Like, are
they looking to find a partner within
the Cuban regime that they could work
with to kind of negotiate change?
Someone like Delcy Rodríguez in
Venezuela, the former vice president to
Maduro who's now leading the country and
working with the US? Is that the best
case here?
Well, it could be. But the experts that
I talked to say, in the words of one of
them, it's a fool's errand to try to
find a Delcy Rodríguez in Cuba.
Why? Because of the nature of their
political system, number one, it's very
unlikely that you would have somebody
who is willing to kind of step out of
the political culture and allow
themselves to be seen as a sort of a
American puppet. At least in Venezuela,
you have a substantial part of the
population
that has some sympathy for the United
States, but there's just going to be
very little of that
in Cuba. The other problem is that it's
a question of what you would want from
the Cubans. And
Rubio gave an interview over the weekend
that gave us some clues as to what they
might be thinking.
And he said that it's really important
that Cuba's government agree to some
significant changes to its state-run
socialist economy. He really emphasized
the economy over the political system.
But he has made clear many times over
the years that other deals the US has
struck with the Cuban government, which
in his view have led to
very incremental reforms,
were almost worse than nothing.
You know, Rubio's reaction is that
that's the Cuban government being
dishonest, playing for time, making
promises it has no intention of keeping,
and eventually reneging on. Well, and to
be fair, it's true that this regime is
absolutely expert in buying time. That
is what they have done over and over
again. This is a a pattern, a
well-established pattern. That's
absolutely right. So, that leaves you
with a situation where it looks like the
Cuban government would have to
essentially agree to its own demise to
get Trump off its back. And that seems
very unlikely. I mean, it's basically
suicidal. Again, you know, I'm talking
to many people who followed the Cuban
leadership over the years, and they say
that they they just can't imagine that
happening. Now, at the same time,
if this economy and society is totally
collapsing around them, and who knows,
maybe at some point you start having
popular protests,
that could convince them to make a deal
like that. But that's a very extreme
situation.
Michael, given those complications, can
we actually just drill down on what
Trump wants here, big picture?
It's not as if Cuba has a ton to offer
at the negotiating table with the US. We
know for Rubio this is personal, but my
impression is that outside of the large
Cuban-American community in South
Florida, not many Americans see toppling
the Cuban regime as a huge priority. So,
what does Trump care about here?
>> great question. I think that most of the
time very few Americans are thinking
about Cuba
and don't really care that much about
it. But having said that, I still think
there's little doubt that if President
Trump were to
bring down
the communist government of Cuba
implanted by Fidel Castro almost 70
years ago
and he was able to do it without
destroying Cuba along the way
I really think that that would be widely
regarded around the world as kind of a
historic triumph. He will have solved a
foreign policy problem that many
presidents before him were stymied by.
Going back to Dwight Eisenhower.
And even those Americans who aren't
thinking about Cuba 99.99%
of the time
if they were to hear that there had been
a breakthrough that the communist
government was stepping down or had
paved the way for its own replacement in
some credible way, I think it would have
a real power.
>> [music]
>> Well, Michael, thank you so much.
Thank you for having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday, a federal judge ordered the
Trump administration to temporarily
restore displays about George
Washington's ownership of enslaved
people at the site of his former house
in Philadelphia. [music]
Last month, National Park Service
workers arrived at the site [music] and
took down displays and video exhibits
describing the nine enslaved people
[music] Washington kept there while he
was president.
The Park Service said the displays were
taken down to ensure, quote, accuracy,
honesty, and alignment with shared
national values.
In her [music] order, the judge wrote
that anyone who visits the President's
House and doesn't learn about founding
era slavery [music]
would get a, quote, false account of
this country's history.
And I love the smell of napalm in the
morning.
Smells like
victory.
The actor [music] Robert Duvall died on
Sunday at the age of 95.
He was known for a delightfully wide
range of leading and supporting roles
[music]
from a principled cowboy to a mafia
consigliere. Nobody has ever gunned down
a New York police captain, never. It
would be disastrous. All the five
families would come after you, Sonny.
The Corleone family would be outcasts.
In [music] a prolific career spanning
more than six decades, Duvall was
nominated for seven Academy Awards and
won once.
I don't know why I wandered after this
part of Texas drunk and [music] you took
me in and pitied me and helped me to
straighten out, married me.
For his performance as a boozy,
washed-up country star in Tender
Mercies. [music]
See, I don't trust hatters.
I never did, I never will. His signature
was immersing himself so deeply in every
role [music]
that he almost seemed to become his
characters.
To prepare for his films, he spent
[music] time with police detectives,
hung out with an ex-convict, and sang
with a country band.
This character is like Shakespeare, I
think. [music]
Duvall's own favorite role was none of
his major big screen characters. I said
like let that English play Hamlet and
>> [music]
>> and and King Lear, that's wonderful.
I'll play Augustus McCrae. I mean, he's
like a modern day knight. It was as
Augustus McCrae, a Texas Ranger in
Lonesome Dove, a mini-series [music]
based on a Larry McMurtry novel.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Carlos Prieto, Olivia Nat, Claire Tennen
Getter, and Astha Chaturvedi.
It was edited by [music] Liz O'Baylen
and Paige Cowett.
Contains music by Rowan Nima Stow,
Alisha [music]
Etoo, and Marion Lozano. And was
engineered by Chris Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.